- [Instructor] So we have seen how to create a thread
using the thread class in your Java application.
Now let's understand how to create a thread
using the Runnable interface.
Runnable interface, like the thread class,
is present under the java.lang package.
And like the thread class again, Runnable interface
has also got the run method declared, which is going
to specify the job of the thread to be spawned, right?
Now, whenever you want to create threads in your system,
this runnable interface option is always preferred.
That's because in Java we all know that we can have a class
that implements multiple interfaces but you cannot
have a class that extends more than one class, right?
So if you try to extend the thread class you wouldn't
be able to extend any other class.
So we generally go with the option
of the runnable interface to create threads
in our multi-threaded Java applications.
So let's go ahead and do a demo for this.
The use case is the same.
We are still going to have the thread doing the job
of reading the file that we have read
in the previous demo, right?
We're going to use a lambda expression to create an instance
of the runnable API, right?
So let's get started.
Another way to create the runnable instance is,
what you can do, you can go to your runnables folder,
and create a class, and see, let's call it AppRunnable.
And you can actually make this class
implement the runnable interface, right?
And then you can actually implement the run method.
Once you write a logical file reading on lines number 16,
then you can actually create an instance of this class.
So let's grab the main material itself.
And how do you create an instance?
You just have to instantiate the subject...
Right?
So this becomes your runnable instance.
So what I did earlier is I tried to create this instance
using our lambda expression.
Let's come to the project and let's create
a test class right away.
Let's call it TestRunnable.
Let's grab the main material, okay.
And let's create an instance
of runnable using lambda expressions,
so I'm gonna say runnable, give the reference a name,
and put in your lambda expression.
Okay, and the code is the same.
You're still reading the file,
so I'm not gonna write that again.
I'll just pull it out from the app thread class.
Let's copy this code, which is the try
with resources statement right up to the end.
Okay, let's copy this so I'm copying lines number 25-34,
and I'll come back to my TestRunnable class,
and I'll just space them here.
Make sure you provide the necessary imports.
Okay, yeah, so that's what it is.
We have the runnable instance ready,
with the help of our lambda expression,
according to Java 1.8 features.
Okay, what's the next step?
Once you create the instance of Runnable,
you can feed that instance to the thread constructor.
Okay, why do we need this?
Let's understand that.
When you talk about starting a thread the way we did
in the previous demo, the stop API is of a level
on the thread class.
In fact, all the API's which will allow you to start
and manage the thread, are on the thread class,
not on the runnable interface, okay?
So what we have to do is we need an instance
of the thread class, so that all those API's
become accessible to us.
So what we do is we create a new thread instance,
and we actually make use of the overloaded
thread constructor, which states a runnable argument.
Great.
And after that, we just have to start the thread.
Right?
That was the last step, you just have to start the thread.
Okay, so now let's go ahead and run this code.
Yeah, so we just have one thread this time,
so thread-0, that's how it is named.
And that's the output of the file that was read.
Okay, so there's a single thread that we
had started in the previous demo.
I actually showed you three threads because I wanted you
to understand how they run in parallel.
Yeah we just have created one thread, and the output
is right there in front of you.
So now there are certain points that we want
to make a note of from this table.
The first thing is, in the previous demo, you saw thread-0,
thread-1, thread-2, and in this demo, you see thread-0
printed on the console.
So the naming convention that Java follows is this:
It will start naming it's threads as thread-0, thread-1,
thread-2 and so on and so forth, right?
That's the first point.
Let's also understand a few other things.
Let's come to the TestThreads class and with one
of the previous demos we talked about the states
of the thread, right?
And then we said that we'd talk more about it in the demo.
Whenever you create an instance of a thread,
it could be through the thread class or it could be
though the Runnable API, right?
In both the cases, when the instance of the thread
is created, the state of the thread is new, okay?
Then, when you start the thread, the state
of the thread becomes runnable.
Runnable means ready to run.
So this is an indication given to the JVM
that yes, this thread is now ready to run.
When your JVM is going to execute the runnable,
as per the scheduling, then that's the point
where the state of the thread becomes running, okay?
And when the job gets completed, that's when the state
of the thread, is terminated, or as we say: dead.
So those are the states of the thread
that the thread transitions through
during its entire lifecycle.
Of course, in between, let's say the thread is
put to sleep, or if the thread is waiting for some resource,
then it will go into the blocked state,
or the waiting state, so that's an additional state
in between.
Okay, another point to note here is,
on the thread instance, on line number 27,
I'm gonna take one of the thread instances,
thread-1, let's say, and you're going to notice
all the API's.
We're just going to go through them quickly.
You have a lot of API's in the thread class.
I mentioned earlier that all the API's to start
and manage the thread are present in the thread instance.
So let's take a look here:
getId, which will get you ID of the thread,
getName, that's gonna get you the name,
Priority, so in my earlier videos I mentioned
that the multi-threading API allows you
to assign a priority, right?
So you have getPriority, and you have setPriority.
It's an integer value.
The minimum is one, and the maximum is 10,
so the higher the integer, the higher the priority, right?
Okay, so what others?
We have the getState API, which will help you
to get the state of the thread, right?
We talked about states a minute ago.
getThreadGroup, which gives you the thread group information
so what happens is in the system
when the thread gets created, it is by default going
to be assigned to a thread group, so that information
can be retrieved using this API.
Then you can check whether the thread is alive,
you can check whether the thread is a daemon thread,
then you can check whether the thread is interrupted,
then you can also join one thread with another,
and you can also make sure that the threads communicate
with each other by notify, notifyAll,
and there's another API called wait, right?
That's called inter-thread communication.
So there's a long list of API's and you can do loads
of stuff using all of these API's that we saw.
Now we are not going to go into the details of these API's
because that's not the focal point of this course.
If you think you need more information on these API's,
I request you to take a course on the basics, very basics
of multi-threading right here on LinkedIn Learning.
This was just a quick revision, a quick overview,
and to make sure that we recollect that there
is a thread class, there's a runnable API,
and what stuff can we do with it, when we want
to create threads in our system.
Okay, so let's get rid of this.
Okay, so that's what the thread
and the runnable interface is all about.
Let's move on to the next video.